{\rtf1\ansi \deff6


{\fonttbl
{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}
{\f1\froman Symbol;}
{\f2\fswiss Arial;}
{\f3\froman Tms Rmn;}
{\f4\fswiss Helv;}
{\f5\fmodern Courier;}
{\f6\fswiss Helvetica;}
}

{\colortbl
\red0\green0\blue0;
}


\pard \sl0 
#{\footnote {\fs16\up6 #}CONVENTIONS}
${\footnote {\fs16\up6 $}Conventions Used in CKS Help}
K{\footnote {\fs16\up6 K}conventions;mouse;shortcuts;utilities;notation;radio buttons;checkboxes;pushbuttons;listboxes}
\b \fs22 Conventions Used in CKS Help\plain \fs22 \par
\par
\plain \b\fs22 Using the mouse\plain \fs22 \par
CKS's on-line help assumes you are familiar with using a mouse.  If you are not, see the tutorial 
information that is included with your operating system.\par
\par
\plain \fs22
o   {\i Click}   is a single-click of the mouse button.\par
\par
o   {\i Double-click}   is two rapid clicks of the mouse button.\par
\par
o   {\i Drag-and-drop}   an icon by selecting it (by clicking on it with the mouse button), and then 
moving it (by holding the mouse button down and moving the mouse pointer to the new 
location).\par
\par
\plain \fs22 {\b CKS Utilities} \par
o  {\i Radio buttons}   are used to select only ONE of a group of options.\par
\par
o  {\i Checkboxes}   are used where one or more options may be selected, but are not required.\par
\par
o  {\i Pushbuttons}   perform various functions throughout CKS.  Click on them to activate them.\par
\par
o  {\i Data entry fields}   are for typing in data.  A blinking cursor indicates an active 
field.  Depending on 
the variable, numeric values can be entered as integers, or in floating point or scientific notation 
formats.\par
o  {\i Listboxes}   allow you to select individual items for data entry or plotting.\par
\par
o  {\i File selection windows}   are used when you create or open a reaction file, external data file, text 
summary or plot file.\par
\par
\plain \fs22 {\b Keyboard shortcuts} \par
Several actions which can be done by clicking with a mouse can also be accomplished using the 
appropriate keyboard shortcuts.\par
\par
o  To {\i Create a new reaction file,}   press the Command-N key combination. \par
\par
o  To {\i Open an existing reaction file,}   press the Command-O key combination. \par
\par
o  To {\i Close a reaction file,}   press the Command-W key combination. \par
\par
o  To {\i Save a reaction file,}   press the Command-S key combination. \par
\par
o  To {\i Create a text summary of a reaction file,}   press the Command-P key combination. \par
\par
o  To {\i quit CKS,}   press the Command-Q key combination. \par
\par
o  To {\i Cut a reaction step from the reaction listbox,}   press the Command-X key combination. \par
\par
o  To {\i Copy a reaction step from the reaction listbox,}   press the Command-C key combination. \par
\par 
o  To {\i Paste a reaction step into the reaction listbox,}   press the Command-V key combination. \par
\par
o  To {\i move}   among the entry fields on the data entry dialog windows, use the TAB key. \par
\par
o  To {\i select a reaction step for editing,}   use the up/down arrows to locate the 
reaction step you are looking for, then press the return key. \par
\par
\plain \fs22 {\b Typographic conventions} \par
{\b Boldface}  is used for menu commands.  When menu commands are given, the name of the 
command is preceeded by the "path" used to access it.  For example, if you need to select 
{\b File|Create}, click on {\b File} on the main menu bar to open the File submenu.  Then click on 
{\b Create}
from the submenu.\par
\par
{\b [Pushbuttons]} are denoted using this notation.\par
\par
Options which are currently inactive are greyed out.\par
\par
\par
\plain \fs22 {\b Other relevant topics:} \par
\pard \fi720\sl0
{\uldb Listboxes}{\v LISTBOXES} \par
\pard \sl0 
\par \pard
\page 



\pard \sl0 
#{\footnote {\fs16\up6 #}PLOTWIN_ATTRIBUTES}
${\footnote {\fs16\up6 $}Plot Attributes}
K{\footnote {\fs16\up6 K}plot attributes;plot colors;plot font;font}
\plain \fs22 \b Plot Attributes\plain  \par
\par
\par
\plain \fs22 You may change the appearance of the plot using the following sets of options:\par
\par
VARY line colors, line styles and marker styles to help differentiate between different data sets.  
These options will have an effect only if the corresponding Show options have been activated.  You 
may select any combination of these options. \par
{\i Note!}  On the Macintosh, all linestyles appear as solid on screen; hardcopy plots produced 
from the PostScript or 
HPGL file output will display different line styles. \par
\par
SHOW lines, markers, file name, and grid allows you to select the elements you use to display your 
results.  You may select any combination of these options.\par
\par
COLOR SET options let you select the palette used to display your simulation results. They are 
labelled according to the plot background.  You may only select one of these options. \par
\par
SELECT FONT allows you to specify the font and size of the text used in the plots.  The font size is 
given in points; available sizes are shown in the drop-down listbox.  An example of the select font 
appears in the window. If the font-point size combination you have chosen is not available on your 
computer, CKS will select an approximation of it for you.\par
\par
\par
These pushbuttons are available:\par
\par
{\b [OK]} accepts the current selections, closes the window, and redraws the plot.\par
\par
{\b [Undo]} resets the attributes to those active when the window was first opened.\par
\par
{\b [Defaults]} resets the attributes to their default settings.\par
\par \pard
\page



\pard \sl0
#{\footnote {\fs16\up6 #}DEFINITION_FILE_SEARCH_TEMPLATE}
\plain \fs22 file search template\par
\par
The location of files having a common file type, for example a reaction file, is given by the file search path. Its 
general form is 
\par 
\par
\f5 \pard \fi180
\b\fs22
drive:directory:subdirectory:filename.\par
\par \pard \plain
\par \pard \page

}
